:orphan:

.. _ref_changelog_rc2:

========
1.0 RC 2
========

This changelog summarizes new features and breaking changes in
EdgeDB 1.0 Release Candidate 2 "Lacaille".

Migrations
==========

We continue fixing bugs that affect schema definitions and migrations.
The most notable changes involve static cardinality inference, so that
computed links and properties can be defined to mimic their regular
counterparts:

* Fix creation of required computed links (:eql:gh:`#2985`).

  This allows having ``required`` links in the schema even if they are
  computed:

  .. code-block:: sdl

    type User {
        required link profile -> Profile;
    }

    type Profile {
        required link user := assert_exists(.<profile[is User]);
    }

* Fix issues when migrating between regular and computed links and
  properties (:eql:gh:`#2411`).

* Fix issues when changing cardinality of computed links and
  properties (:eql:gh:`#3003`).

* Fix how ``alter`` suggestions are rejected when processing
  migrations, making sure that they don't repeat (:eql:gh:`#3111`).


EdgeQL
======

* Make static analysis correctly handle the cardinality of things
  wrapped in :eql:func:`enumerate` (:eql:gh:`#3014`).

  This means that if you wrap a single property into
  :eql:func:`enumerate` it still is correctly inferred to produce no
  more than one result:

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> select User {comp := enumerate(.name)};
    {default::User {comp: (0, 'alice')}}

* Fix some issues with :eql:func:`enumerate` applied to the results of
  another function (:eql:gh:`#3025`).

* Fix :eql:func:`assert_distinct` on tuples (:eql:gh:`#2990`).

* Fix a case where :eql:stmt:`for` over an empty set erroneously
  produced a non-empty result (:eql:gh:`#3012`).

* Fix :eql:constraint:`exclusive` constraint issue when conflicting
  entries are inserted at the same time (:eql:gh:`#3022`).

* Fix issues with how tuple elements are correlated (:eql:gh:`#3001`).

* Fix how functions or operators with ``optional`` parameters such as
  :eql:op:`?? <coalesce>` interact with shape subqueries
  (:eql:gh:`#3008`).

  This makes it possible to have a shape as one element of a tuple to
  be correlated with the expression in the other tuple element:

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> select (
    ...   User {name, friends: {name}},
    ...   User.friends.name ?? 'n/a'
    ... );
    {
      (
        default::User {
          name: 'Alice',
          friends: {default::User {name: 'Billie'}},
        },
        'Billie',
      ),
      (
        default::User {
          name: 'Alice',
          friends: {default::User {name: 'Cameron'}},
        },
        'Cameron',
      ),
      (
        default::User {
          name: 'Alice',
          friends: {default::Bot {name: 'Dana'}},
        },
        'Dana',
      ),
      (default::User {name: 'Billie', friends: {}}, 'n/a'),
      (default::User {name: 'Cameron', friends: {}}, 'n/a'),
      (
        default::Bot {
          name: 'Dana',
          friends: {default::User {name: 'Billie'}},
        },
        'Billie',
      ),
    }

* Fix issues with arrays of objects of related types (:eql:gh:`#2256`).

  Trying to build an array where elements are not of the same object
  type, but of related types no longer produces an error:

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> select [(select User filter .name = 'alice'), (select SystemUser)];
    {
      [
        default::User {id: 8f69777e-3129-11ec-ba91-0f55d65fd8d7},
        default::SystemUser {id: 89c0e596-3129-11ec-ba91-2f631728aea3},
      ],
    }

  Conceptually, there's no difference between first creating a set via
  :eql:op:`union` and using :eql:func:`array_agg` on it or using an
  array constructor directly and supply the individual elements as
  subqueries.

* Fix many bugs with objects inside arrays and tuples (:eql:gh:`#2992`).

  Packing and unpacking objects into arrays and tuples now works more
  reliably. You can make use of the different way of selecting the
  data, aggregate it using :eql:func:`array_agg` or by some other
  means and still be able to access the elements to get their nested
  contents in queries:

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> select [(User,)][0];
    {
      (default::User {id: 8f69777e-3129-11ec-ba91-0f55d65fd8d7}),
    }
    db> select ([User],).0;
    {
      [default::User {id: 8f69777e-3129-11ec-ba91-0f55d65fd8d7}],
    }

* Fix some issues with ad-hoc computed links or properties inside
  arrays (:eql:gh:`#2979`).

* Fix :eql:op:`and` to consistently apply to properties and produce
  an ``{}`` even for the case of ``False and {}`` (:eql:gh:`#3121`).

* Restrict :eql:op:`| <typeor>` operator to object types only
  (:eql:gh:`#3116`).

* Reserve ``never`` as a keyword for future use (:eql:gh:`#3102`).


GraphQL
=======

* Make ``and`` and ``or`` in GraphQL use "short-circuiting" logic.

  In EdgeQL :eql:op:`and` and :eql:op:`or` produce ``{}`` if any of
  the operands are ``{}``. There are different ways of handling the
  ``{}`` by using :eql:op:`?? <coalesce>` or :eql:op:`if..else` operator.
  However, within the restricted context of operations reflected to
  GraphQL ``filter`` it makes sense to use "short-circuiting" versions
  of the operators and enforce that if any of the operands to ``or``
  are ``true``, so is the result and similarly if any of the operands
  to ``and`` are ``false`` so is the result.

* Hide ``id`` as well as computed links and properties from mutation
  (:eql:gh:`#3109`).


Configuration
=============

A lot of the :ref:`configuration <ref_std_cfg>` settings used to be
strings that simply mapped to Postgres settings. We now use more
appropriate types for expressing configuration values:
:eql:type:`bool`, :eql:type:`int64`, :eql:type:`duration`, in addition
to :eql:type:`str`.

We also introduce a new scalar :eql:type:`cfg::memory` to represent
size of various memory storage in a clear and unambiguous way.


Bindings
========

We now have the *client* abstraction superceding the *connection* and
*pool* abstractions. There's no conceptual difference between a pool
of size 1 and a single connection, so we decided that the API should
reflect that. So we introduce a single concept of *client* to send
queries to the database and let this *client* encapsulate the handling
of concurrent connections.

We're making our binding more robust by adding "retry options" to our
interface. What it means is that read-only queries and all
transactions can be automatically retried in case of certain kinds of
errors (such as network errors) without the need for any extra code on
the part of the developers. This also means that we no longer have
"raw" and "retrying" transactions in the APIs, but all transactions
are retrying. To get the same behavior as for "raw" transactions the
maximum number of attempts can be explicitly specified as ``1``.

We're also in the process of cleaning up our APIs and removing the
deprecated functions.

* Support connection pooling by default and retry features for
  `edgedb-python <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-python>`_ and
  release v0.18.0a2 driver.
* Support connection pooling by default and retry features for
  `edgedb-js <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-js>`_ and release
  v0.15.3 driver.
* Support connection pooling by default and retry features for
  `edgedb-go <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-go>`_ and release
  v0.8.3 driver.

Environment variable renames
============================

For clarity and simplicity, several environment variables have been renamed
and the set of supported values has been modified. The old variables have been
deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

.. list-table::

  * - **Old name**
    - **New name**
  * - ``EDGEDB_TLS_VERIFY_HOSTNAME``
    - ``EDGEDB_CLIENT_TLS_SECURITY``
  * - ``EDGEDB_NO_VERSION_CHECK``
    - ``EDGEDB_RUN_VERSION_CHECK``
  * - ``EDGEDB_SKIP_DOCKER_CHECK``
    - ``EDGEDB_INSTALL_IN_DOCKER``
  * - ``EDGEDB_SERVER_ALLOW_INSECURE_BINARY_CLIENTS``
    - ``EDGEDB_SERVER_BINARY_ENDPOINT_SECURITY``
  * - ``EDGEDB_SERVER_ALLOW_INSECURE_HTTP_CLIENTS``
    - ``EDGEDB_SERVER_HTTP_ENDPOINT_SECURITY``
  * - ``EDGEDB_SERVER_INSECURE_DEV_MODE``
    - ``EDGEDB_SERVER_SECURITY``
  * - ``EDGEDB_SERVER_SKIP_MIGRATIONS``
    - ``EDGEDB_DOCKER_APPLY_MIGRATIONS``
  * - ``EDGEDB_SERVER_GENERATE_SELF_SIGNED_CERT``
    - ``EDGEDB_SERVER_TLS_CERT_MODE``
  * - ``EDGEDB_HIDE_GENERATED_CERT``
    - ``EDGEDB_DOCKER_SHOW_GENERATED_CERT``


Client configuration
--------------------

``EDGEDB_CLIENT_TLS_SECURITY``
    - ``insecure``
    - ``no_host_verification``
    - ``strict``
    - ``default``: ``no_host_verification`` if custom certificate is supplied,
      otherwise ``strict``

**New**: ``EDGEDB_CLIENT_SECURITY``
    - ``default``
    - ``insecure_dev_mode``: for now, equivalent to setting
      ``EDGEDB_CLIENT_TLS_SECURITY=insecure`` though this mode may
      encapsulate other behavior later

``EDGEDB_RUN_VERSION_CHECK``
    - ``cached == default`` — run occasionally
    - ``never`` — skips the check

``EDGEDB_INSTALL_IN_DOCKER`` (CLI only)
  - ``forbid == default``
  - ``allow`` — skips the check

Server configuration
--------------------

``EDGEDB_SERVER_BINARY_ENDPOINT_SECURITY``
    - ``tls == default``
    - ``optional`` — allow no TLS

``EDGEDB_SERVER_HTTP_ENDPOINT_SECURITY``
    - ``tls == default``
    - ``optional`` — allow no TLS

``EDGEDB_SERVER_SECURITY``
    - ``strict == default``
    - ``insecure_dev_mode`` — disable password-based authentication and allow
      unencrypted HTTP traffic

``EDGEDB_DOCKER_APPLY_MIGRATIONS`` (Docker only)
    - ``always == default``
    - ``never``

``EDGEDB_SERVER_TLS_CERT_MODE``
    - ``require_file`` — requires a valid TLS certificate and key to be
      specified
    - ``generate_self_signed`` generate self-signed certificate and private
      key on bootstrap if certificate or key are not specified or missing
    - ``default`` (equals to ``require_file`` if ``EDGEDB_SERVER_SECURITY``
      is set to ``strict``, equals to ``generate_self_signed`` if
      ``EDGEDB_SERVER_SECURITY`` is set to ``insecure_dev_mode``)

``EDGEDB_DOCKER_SHOW_GENERATED_CERT``
    - ``always == default``
    - ``never``
