========
1.0 RC 1
========

This changelog summarizes new features and breaking changes in
EdgeDB 1.0 Release Candidate 1 "Epsilon Eridani".


Migrations
==========

We continue fixing bugs that affect schema definitions and migrations:

* Always escape newlines when string literals appear in automatically
  generated code, such as in migrations (:eql:gh:`#2704`).
* Fix behavior of ``SET MULTI`` to make sure that it does not imply
  ``SET REQUIRED`` (:eql:gh:`#2778`).
* Make properties non-distinct by default (:eql:gh:`#2853`).

  All values in EdgeQL are considered to be :ref:`multisets
  <ref_eql_fundamentals_set>`, which are a generalization of the set
  concept that allows duplicate elements. For brevity we refer to
  multisets as just "sets", and use "proper set" or "distinct set"
  when referring to proper mathematical sets.

  In EdgeDB the data is modeled as a directed graph, where objects are
  vertices and links are edges.  Query path expressions
  (``Foo.bar.baz``) are graph traversal operators and, by definition,
  always return a *distinct set*.  This means that there can be no
  link of the same name between a pair of objects, and this also means
  that a set of objects pointed to by a ``multi`` link is always
  distinct.  Computed links must follow this rule too so as to behave
  exactly like materialized links externally.  To illustrate, consider
  a common case of finding a set of "friends of friends" of a
  particular user.  In EdgeQL this is simply ``SELECT
  User.friends.friends``.

  Properties are different, because their value is scalar, and scalars
  lack true identity, which makes any proper set mechanics on scalar
  sets expensive due to explicit elimination of duplicates.
  Furthermore, non-distinct scalar sets are actually *desirable* in
  many queries, especially where analytics and tuples are involved.
  Finally, we should enforce consistent multiplicity rules on computed
  properties, and static inference of multiplicity on scalars is weak
  and will effectively force users to pollute queries with pointless
  and expensive :eql:op:`DISTINCT`.

  Here we change EdgeDB behavior to allow multiplicity *greater than
  one* in ``multi`` properties.

* Fix the error when an object function is created alongside its
  object (:eql:gh:`#2834`).

* Fix handling of function overloads on object type parameters
  (:eql:gh:`#2889`).

  The current approach places a number of restrictions on overloads
  of object type functions:

  - there must be no difference in any but one parameter type, i.e.
    this is single dispatch
  - the names of all parameters must match

  These restrictions apply only to functions that are actually
  overloaded with a different object type. Overloading with scalar
  types is perfectly OK even if the rest of the parameter types differ:

  .. code-block:: sdl

    function func(a: Foo, b: int32) -> int64 using ( BODY );
    function func(a: Bar, b: int32) -> int64 using ( BODY );
    function func(a: str, b: int32, c: int64) -> int64 using ( BODY );

* Make computed links and properties defined in the schema behave the
  same way as the equivalent computed links and properties defined
  ad-hoc directly in the query (:eql:gh:`#2558`).


EdgeQL
======

* Drop ``FINAL`` from the syntax (:eql:gh:`#2607`).
* Restore the precedence of :ref:`DETACHED <ref_eql_with_detached>` to
  no longer match that of :eql:op:`EXISTS` undoing the change
  :eql:gh:`#2638`.
* Fix ``UNLESS CONFLICT`` with inheritance hierarchies (:eql:gh:`#2525`).
* Always use serializable isolation (:eql:gh:`#2877`).
* Correctly raise exclusive constraints when performing an ``INSERT``
  or an ``UPDATE`` on related types (:eql:gh:`#2845`).
* Enforce link or property cardinality in mutations (:eql:gh:`#2827`).
* Fix cardinality inference in "optionality-preserving" functions
  (:eql:gh:`#2844`).

  A certain number of standard aggregate functions are guaranteed to
  preserve the lower cardinality bound of their argument.  These
  functions are :eql:func:`assert_single`, :eql:func:`enumerate`,
  :eql:func:`min`, and :eql:func:`max`.

  Unfortunately, there is currently no way to signal that lower
  cardinality is preserved for user-defined functions. We introduce
  the new std-only ``preserves_cardinality`` field, which is also
  exposed in the public introspection schema for the benefit of query
  builders and such.

* Implement :eql:func:`assert_exists` which allows to perform a
  cardinality check in run-time (:eql:gh:`#2901`):

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> SELECT assert_exists((SELECT User FILTER .name = "Administrator"))
    {default::User {id: ...}}

    db> SELECT assert_exists((SELECT User FILTER .name = "Nonexistent"))
    ERROR: CardinalityViolationError: assert_exists violation: expression
           returned an empty set.

* Fix deletion issues for multi properties (:eql:gh:`#2883`).

* Disallow some broken DML/volatile interactions (:eql:gh:`#2811`).
* Fix volatility inference of functions taking object arguments to be
  at most ``Stable`` because it triggers a table scan
  (:eql:gh:`#2890`).
* Fix a regression when objects from opaque sources are passed to
  functions (:eql:gh:`#2924`).

* Fix accessing link properties on union types (:eql:gh:`#2513`).
* Fix some introspection issues with backlinks (:eql:gh:`#2599`)
* Fix bare backlink schema-defined computed link (:eql:gh:`#2605`).
* Make filtered backlinks work even when there exists a computed
  backlink (:eql:gh:`#2698`).

* Fix handling of the ``optional`` specifier in shapes to be similar
  to SDL (:eql:gh:`#2900`).


Command-Line Tools
==================

* Add the :ref:`cli.toml <ref_cli_edgedb_config>` global configuration
  file for customizing the CLI and REPL behavior. The location of the
  file is shown as "Config" by :ref:`ref_cli_edgedb_info`.

* Make SCRAM the default auth method (:eql:gh:`#2848`).
* Add a server option to specify the default authentication method
  (:eql:gh:`#2936`).

  This patch adds the new ``--default-auth-method`` argument as well as
  its companion ``EDGEDB_SERVER_DEFAULT_AUTH_METHOD`` environment
  variable to set the default authentication method.


Bindings
========

We've updated the binary protocol to version 0.12 which brings some
performance and other improvements.

* Support protocol 0.12 features features for `edgedb-python
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-python>`_ and release v0.18.0
  driver.
* Support protocol 0.12 features features for `edgedb-js
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-js>`_ and release v0.15.2
  driver.
* Support protocol 0.12 features features for `edgedb-go
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-go>`_ and release v0.8.2
  driver.

