:orphan:

.. _ref_changelog_alpha4:

===========
1.0 Alpha 4
===========

This changelog summarizes new features and breaking changes in
`EdgeDB 1.0 alpha 4 "Barnard's Star"
<https://www.edgedb.com/blog/edgedb-1-0-alpha-4-barnard-s-star>`_.


EdgeQL
======

* Add ``__std__`` alias for ``std`` module so that there's a way to refer
  to the standard module which cannot be masked by a ``with std as
  module foo`` construct (:eql:gh:`#1457`).
* Allow explicit ``optional`` qualifier for links and properties in
  DDL and SDL. In particular, use it in :eql:stmt:`describe` command
  output. (:eql:gh:`#1342`).
* Only show link properties on computed links that are aliases.
* :eql:stmt:`describe` command now shows matches that are
  potentially masked by the user-defined types or functions (:eql:gh:`#1439`).
* Add ``describe roles`` and ``describe instance config`` to the
  :eql:stmt:`describe` command.
* Allow underscore in numeric literals and forbids float and decimal
  constants to end in ``.`` (:eql:gh:`#920`).
* Validate the ``required`` flag on computed links and properties
  (:eql:gh:`#217`).
* Forbid reference to link properties outside of a path expression
  (:eql:gh:`#1512`).
* Allow annotations to be renamed (:eql:gh:`#762`).
* Initial implementation of the new migration syntax
  (`RFC 1000 <migrations_>`_).


CLI
===

* We have a new ``edgedb server`` group of commands that ships with
  the default EdgeDB CLI. Check out the details in this `RFC 1001
  <edbserver_>`_.
* The ``edgedb`` REPL prompt now has a transaction indicator:

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    edgedb> start transaction;
    OK: START TRANSACTION
    edgedb[T]>


Server
======

* Remove reliance on Postgres table inheritance (:eql:gh:`#1468`)
* The ``edgedb-server`` installed by official installers is now called
  ``edgedb-server-1-alpha4``.


Misc
====

* Rename ``fetch`` to ``query`` in the `edgedb-js
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-js>`_ and the `edgedb-python
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-python>`_ drivers.
* Add connection pooling to `edgedb-js <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-js>`_
  driver.
* Update the `edgedb-js <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-js>`_ driver
  to v0.8.0.
* Update the `edgedb-python <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-python>`_
  driver to v0.9.0.



.. _migrations:
    https://github.com/edgedb/rfcs/blob/master/text/1000-migrations.rst
.. _edbserver:
    https://github.com/edgedb/rfcs/blob/master/text/
    1001-edgedb-server-control.rst
