.. _ref_changelog_rc3:

========
1.0 RC 3
========

This changelog summarizes changes and bugfixes in EdgeDB 1.0 Release
Candidate 3 "Cygni". This release is focusing on fixing existing
issues rather than introducing new features.


Packaging
=========

The biggest change in this release is in how EdgeDB is packaged. We
now have a "portable build" that runs on any non-legacy Linux or macOS
system. The purpose is to avoid restrictions that supporting native
packaging systems imposes. Because of this we recommend a more
explicit ``dump``/``restore`` upgrade workflow to get your instances
to RC3.

Before you start you may want to backup the instance credentials
(which you can find in the "Config" directory indicated by
:ref:`ref_cli_edgedb_info`). The first step in the upgrade process
will be backing up all the instance data and that will include the
login credentials that the instance expects. After restoring the
database dump, you may need to restore old credentials file as
well.

Project upgrade
---------------

If you have an EdgeDB project, you can upgrade it to RC3 using the
following steps from the project directory:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb dump --all --format=dir ./upgrade_backup
    $ edgedb project unlink -D
    $ edgedb project upgrade --to-latest
    $ edgedb project init --no-migrations
    $ edgedb restore --admin --all ./upgrade_backup

Now that the project has been re-initialized and data dump is
restored, we need to restore the login credentials. Which presents a
couple of options. If there's no code outside the project directory
that actually requires access to the database, the recommended option
is to reset the password:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb instance reset-password my_instance

Alternatively we can restore the old credentials:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb instance reset-password my_instance --password


Instance upgrade
----------------

If you have an EdgeDB instance that's not part of a project, you can
upgrade it to RC3 using the following steps:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb dump -I my_instance --all --format=dir ./my_instance_backup
    $ edgedb instance destroy my_instance
    $ edgedb instance create my_instance
    $ edgedb restore -I my_instance --admin --all ./my_instance_backup

Now that the instance has been re-initialized and data dump is
restored, we need to restore the login credentials. Which presents a
couple of options. If there's no code that uses the login credentials
explicitly, but rather relies on the instance name only to access to
the database, the recommended approach is to reset the password:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb instance reset-password my_instance

Alternatively we can restore the old credentials:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb instance reset-password my_instance --password


EdgeQL
======

* Support path prefix in link constraints (:eql:gh:`#3206`).

  It is now possible to use shorthand path expression referring to
  link properties in constraint expressions:

  .. code-block:: sdl

    type Foo {
        link bar -> Object {
            property linkprop -> str;
            constraint expression on (@linkprop != "lol");
        }
    }

* Support path prefix in link indexes (:eql:gh:`#3202`).

  It is now possible to use shorthand path expression referring to
  link properties in index expressions:

  .. code-block:: sdl

    abstract link friendship {
        property strength -> float64;
        index on (@strength);
    }

* Implement index and slicing of JSON strings (:eql:gh:`#3203`).

  We already implement :eql:op:`++ <JSONPLUS>` for JSON strings, but
  indexing operations were left out until now. This change fixes this
  oversight:

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> select to_json('"hello"')[0];
    {"\"h\""}
    db> select to_json('"hello"')[1:3];
    {"\"el\""}

* Fix some corner cases of functions without ``OPTIONAL`` or ``SET
  OF`` arguments being called on empty input (:eql:gh:`#3195`).

* Fix some corner cases of changing link type (:eql:gh:`#3183`).


Bindings
========

We are in the process of dropping old deprecated APIs before rolling
out production-ready EdgeDB.

* Clean up the API for `edgedb-python
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-python>`_ and release v0.19.0
  driver.
* Clean up the API for `edgedb-js
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-js>`_ and release v0.17.0 driver.
* Clean up the API for `edgedb-go
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-go>`_ and release v0.9.0 driver.
