.. _ref_changelog_alpha7:

===========
1.0 Alpha 7
===========

This changelog summarizes new features and breaking changes in
EdgeDB 1.0 alpha 7 "Lalande".


EdgeQL
======

* Add support for per-database configuration by adding a new
  :eql:stmt:`CURRENT DATABASE <CONFIGURE>` configuration scope
  (:eql:gh:`#1867`).

  This allows to make changes that are more broad
  that :eql:stmt:`SESSION <CONFIGURE>` scope and less broad that
  :eql:stmt:`SYSTEM <CONFIGURE>`:

  .. code-block:: edgeql

    CONFIGURE CURRENT DATABASE SET query_work_mem := '4MB';

* Add support for altering :eql:type:`enums <std::enum>` in order to
  add new labels (:eql:gh:`#1956`).

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> CREATE SCALAR TYPE Color
    ...     EXTENDING enum<Red, Green, Blue>;
    OK: CREATE
    db> ALTER SCALAR TYPE Color
    ...     EXTENDING enum<Red, Green, Blue, Magic>;
    OK: ALTER

* Update :eql:type:`std::decimal` and :eql:type:`std::bigint` criteria
  to be sensitive to the presence of ``.`` so that ``123.0e100n`` is a
  decimal, but ``123e100n`` is a bigint (:eql:gh:`#1804`).

* Functions can now return a set of tuples (:eql:gh:`#2010`).

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> CREATE FUNCTION enumerate_letters(word: str)
    ...     -> SET OF tuple<int64, str>
    ...     USING (
    ...         enumerate(
    ...             array_unpack(
    ...                 str_split(word, '')))
    ...     );
    OK: CREATE
    db> SELECT enumerate_letters('hello');
    {(0, 'h'), (1, 'e'), (2, 'l'), (3, 'l'), (4, 'o')}

* Functions can no longer share a shortname with types in order to
  avoid name resolution issues (:eql:gh:`#1465`).
* Forbid taking implicit cross products with volatile operations to
  avoid unintuitive behavior (:eql:gh:`#1784`).

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> SELECT ({1, 2}, random());
    error: can not take cross product of volatile operation
      ┌─ query:1:17
      │
    1 │ SELECT ({1, 2}, random());
      │                 ^^^^^^^^^ error
    db> FOR x IN {1, 2} UNION (x, random());
    {(1, 0.25724045818607166), (2, 0.7268530965023459)}

* Forbid scalar types from having more than one concrete base
  (:eql:gh:`#1790`).
* Forbid partial path expressions in :ref:`LIMIT
  <ref_eql_statements_select>`/:ref:`OFFSET
  <ref_eql_statements_select>` clauses (:eql:gh:`#1919`).
* Forbid changing cardinality via inheritance (:eql:gh:`#1772`).
* Remove legacy unused ``.>`` token (:eql:gh:`#1648`).
* Fix cardinality inference on operators (:eql:gh:`#2001`).


Migrations
==========

We've made a lot of progress in implementing features of the `RFC 1000
<migrations_>`_ migrations, although this is still a feature under
development. Some of the works can be broadly categorized as overall
improvement of the proposed migration DDL and the granularity of the
control the user has over these proposed changes. More specifically
we've made a lot of improvements in migrations that alter or remove
things from the schema.

Here's an example of creating a schema with a type that has a property
with a default value:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> START MIGRATION TO {
    ...   module default {
    ...     type Foo {
    ...       property val -> str {
    ...         default := 'n/a'
    ...       }
    ...     }
    ...   }
    ... };

We use :eql:stmt:`DESCRIBE CURRENT MIGRATION AS JSON <DESCRIBE CURRENT
MIGRATION>` to see what EdgeDB is proposing. The JSON format makes it
easier to potentially integrate this with other tools. For this
example it's worth turning on ``json`` output mode for edgedb REPL:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> \set output-mode json
    db[tx]> DESCRIBE CURRENT MIGRATION AS JSON;
    [
      {
        "complete": false,
        "confirmed": [],
        "parent": "m16wif5skjyqd6dbp5uwa67qrgw422qcwa3vctx77z7r34yx5mbigq",
        "proposed": {
          "confidence": 1.0,
          "operation_id": "CREATE TYPE default::Foo",
          "prompt": "did you create object type 'default::Foo'?",
          "statements": [{"text": "CREATE TYPE default::Foo {\n
          CREATE OPTIONAL SINGLE PROPERTY val -> std::str {\n
          SET default := 'n/a';\n    };\n};"}]
        }
      }
    ]

Since proposed statements look OK, we can go ahead and just apply the
whole migration.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db[tx]> POPULATE MIGRATION;
    OK: POPULATE MIGRATION
    db[tx]> COMMIT MIGRATION;
    OK: COMMIT MIGRATION

Now, let's remove that ``default``, after all the property is optional.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> START MIGRATION TO {
    ...   module default {
    ...     type Foo {
    ...       property val -> str;
    ...     }
    ...   }
    ... };
    db[tx]> DESCRIBE CURRENT MIGRATION AS JSON;
    [
      {
        "complete": false,
        "confirmed": [],
        "parent": "initial",
        "proposed": {
          "confidence": 0.9956623333333332,
          "operation_id": "ALTER TYPE default::Foo",
          "prompt": "did you alter object type 'default::Foo'?",
          "statements": [{"text": "ALTER TYPE default::Foo {\n
          ALTER PROPERTY val {\n        DROP default;\n    };\n};"}]
        }
      }
    ]

The proposed statements will ``DROP default`` for our property, so all
seems to be in order and we can apply this migration, too, using
:eql:stmt:`POPULATE MIGRATION` and :eql:stmt:`COMMIT MIGRATION`.

We're currently working on a CLI tool for managing migrations more
gracefully and without the need for the user to rely on these
low-level commands (like ``START MIGRATION`` or ``DESCRIBE CURRENT
MIGRATION AS JSON``). The migration tool is going to use these
commands behind the scenes, though.

We've also made improvements to the following migration features:

* Better overall dependency tracking to make sure that migration to
  the new state can be resolved and produces valid command sequence.
* Type, index and alias renaming while keeping track of affected
  expressions to make sure they don't become invalid (:eql:gh:`#1841`)
* Function renaming (:eql:gh:`#1971`)
* Moving a type between modules (:eql:gh:`#1890`).
* Changing base types and changing where constraints are defined
  (:eql:gh:`#1996`).


Command-Line Tools
==================

* Default user and default database are now simply ``edgedb`` and no
  longer named after the system user.
* Add ``--connect-timeout`` to control how long to wait for EdgeDB
  response (`#191 <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-cli/pull/191>`_).
* Add ``--dsn`` as a connection option (`#176
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-cli/issues/176>`_).
* Add ``migration-log`` command to view applied migrations (`#200
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-cli/pull/200>`_).
* Non-interactive error messages are prefixed by ``edgedb error:
  ...``, to quickly spot which tool has errored in scripts.
* Improve accuracy of syntax error reporting in REPL (:eql:gh:`#1959`).
* REPL now supports full range of datetime values (`#192
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-cli/pull/192>`_).
* ``\lt`` in REPL doesn't show implicit internal types (unions and
  intersections) (`#169 <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-cli/issues/169>`_).
* Remove ``\set introspect-types`` in REPL and show typenames by
  default.


Server Command-Line
===================

* Make ``edgedb server install`` friendlier on linuxes without systemd
  allowing foreground run (`#171
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-cli/pull/171>`_).
* When installing server ``DEBIAN_FRONTEND`` is now ``noninteractive`` by
  default and is overridable (`#188
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-cli/pull/188>`_).
* Add ``edgedb server logs`` (`#172
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-cli/pull/172>`_).
* Add ``edgedb server info`` command.
* Deprecate ``--default-database`` and ``--default-database-user``
  (:eql:gh:`#1879`).


Bindings
========

We now have an improved spec for client API (`RFC 1004 <robust_>`_).
Rolling out the support for the full spec will be done in the next
release, but some implementation work has already started.

* Move request methods into Executor interface (`#76
  <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-js/pull/76>`_) as part of the `RFC
  1004 <robust_>`_ changes.
* Update the `edgedb-python <https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb-python>`_ driver
  to 0.12.0.


.. _robust:
    https://github.com/edgedb/rfcs/blob/master/text/1004-transactions-api.rst

.. _migrations:
    https://github.com/edgedb/rfcs/blob/master/text/1000-migrations.rst
