====
v5.0
====

:edb-alt-title: EdgeDB v5

To play with the new features, make sure to specify version 5.0 when
initializing the project as pre-release versions are not considered stable
and will not be automatically suggested:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ edgedb project init


Upgrading
=========

**Local and Cloud instances**

To upgrade a local project, first ensure that your CLI is up to date with
``edgedb cli upgrade``. Then run the following command inside the project
directory.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ edgedb project upgrade

Alternatively, specify an instance name if you aren't using a project.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ edgedb instance upgrade -I my_instance

The CLI will first check to see if your schema will migrate cleanly to EdgeDB
5.0. If the upgrade check finds any problems, it will report them back to you.

**Hosted instances**

To upgrade a remote (hosted) instance, we recommend the following
dump-and-restore process.

1. EdgeDB v5.0 supports PostgreSQL 14 (or above). So check the version of
   PostgreSQL you are using before upgrading EdgeDB. If you're using Postgres
   13 or below, you should upgrade Postgres first.

2. Spin up an empty 5.0 instance. You can use one of our :ref:`deployment
   guides <ref_guide_deployment>`.

   Under Debian/Ubuntu, when adding the EdgeDB package repository, use this
   command instead:

   .. code-block:: bash

       $ echo deb [signed-by=/usr/local/share/keyrings/edgedb-keyring.gpg] \
           https://packages.edgedb.com/apt \
           $(grep "VERSION_CODENAME=" /etc/os-release | cut -d= -f2) main \
           | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/edgedb.list

   Use this command for installation under Debian/Ubuntu:

   .. code-block:: bash

       $ sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install edgedb-5

   Under CentOS/RHEL, use this installation command:

   .. code-block:: bash

       $ sudo yum install edgedb-5

   In any required ``systemctl`` commands, replace ``edgedb-server-4`` with
   ``edgedb-server-5``.

   Under any Docker setups, supply the ``5.0`` tag.

3. Take your application offline, then dump your v4.x database with the CLI

   .. code-block:: bash

       $ edgedb dump --dsn <old dsn> --all --format dir my_database.dump/

   This will dump the schema and contents of your current database to a
   directory on your local disk called ``my_database.dump``. The directory name
   isn't important.

4. Restore the empty v5.x instance from the dump

   .. code-block:: bash

       $ edgedb restore --all my_database.dump/ --dsn <new dsn>

   Once the restore is complete, update your application to connect to the new
   instance.

   This process will involve some downtime, specifically during steps 2 and 3.


New features
============

EdgeDB + AI
-----------

We've added an ``ext::ai`` extension for handling the integration of EdgeDB
with various AI backends such as: OpenAI, Mistral and Anthropic.

There is a special ``ext::ai::index`` that can be used to delegate the search
functionality of EdgeDB objects to a specific AI search provider.

The function ``ext::ai::to_context(object: anyobject)`` evaluates the
expression of the specific ``ext::ai::index`` defined on the passed object
type and returns it.

The function ``ext::ai:search(object: anyobject, query: array<float32>)``
searches the specified objects using the associated AI search provider and the
specified semantic query representation.

There are also two HTTP API points for interacting with the data:

* ``/ai/embeddings``
* ``/ai/rag``

EdgeDB branches
---------------

EdgeDB 5.0 adds branching functionality in order to help bridge the gap between
the code (and schema) managed by version control systems and the actual
development database.

The first thing to note is that we're updating our terminology and replacing
the old (and potentially confusing) term ``database`` with ``branch``. This
means that the old ``create database`` and ``drop database`` commands are
considered deprecated in favor of ``create empty branch`` and ``drop branch``,
respectively. However, the new ``branch`` commands provide more options and
functionality than the old ``database`` commands:

1) ``create empty branch <newbranch>``

   The most basic command creates a new branch with an empty schema
   (exactly the same as ``create database``).

2) ``create schema branch <newbranch> from <oldbranch>``

   This command creates a new branch and copies the schema of an existing
   branch to it. Only the schema is copied; the data is still empty and needs
   to be populated separately.

3) ``create data branch <newbranch> from <oldbranch>``

   This command creates a new branch and copies both the schema and the data
   of an existing branch to it.

4) ``drop branch <oldbranch>``

   Removes an existing branch from the instance.

5) ``alter branch <oldname> rename to <newname>``

   The command to rename a branch.

The intent is to provide a mechanism that helps developers keep branches of
the database corresponding to the code branches that introduce certain schema
changes.

With these new commands, here's how we envision developers using them to
manage "feature" branches:

1) Create a new "feature" VCS branch (a clone of the "main" branch) and a
   corresponding "feature" EdgeDB branch.

2) Work on the "feature" branch, add migrations, etc.

3) When it is time to merge the feature work back into the main branch we want
   to arrange things so that the "feature" branch is in a state that is a
   simple fast-forward w.r.t the "main" branch.

4) In order to achieve the above state we need to make sure the "main" code
   branch as well as the EdgeDB branch are both up-to-date.

5) Then we want to rebase the "feature" branch code on top of the "main"
   branch code.

6) After that we need to replicate the same rebase operation with the EdgeDB
   branch. Our CLI tools may need to first clone the "main" branch with the
   data into a "temp" branch. Then we can introspect the migration histories
   of the "temp" and "feature" branches so that we can establish where they
   diverge. Take all the divergent migrations from the "feature" branch and
   apply them to the "temp" branch. If the operation is successful, drop the
   "feature" branch and rename "temp" to "feature". We now have successfully
   rebased "feature" branch on top of "main".

7) Since the state of "feature" is now a straightforward fast-forward w.r.t.
   the "main" branch we can finally merge "feature" back into main in VCS and
   then merge the EdgeDB branch as well (or rename the "feature" EdgeDB branch
   to "main", if the old branch is no longer needed).

We've added :ref:`edgedb branch commands <ref_cli_edgedb_branch>` to our CLI
as well that create, copy, rename, drop, and rebase EdgeDB branches.


Updated pgvector extension
--------------------------

A new HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small Worlds) index has been added to the
``pgvector`` extension. Just like IVFFlat indexes there are three flavors of
HNSW corresponding to different operations:

* ``ext::pgvector::hnsw_euclidean``
* ``ext::pgvector::hnsw_ip``
* ``ext::pgvector::hnsw_cosine``

We have also updated the mechanism for tuning all of the indexes provided in
this extension. The ``probes`` (for IVFFlat) and ``ef_search`` (for HNSW)
parameters can now be accessed via the ``ext::pgvector::Config`` object.

The current config values can be found by examining the ``extensions`` link of
the ``cfg::Config`` object. Notice that in order to see the specific extension
config properties you need to use the type filter :eql:op:`[is
ext::pgvector::Config] <isintersect>`:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> select cfg::Config.extensions[is ext::pgvector::Config]{*};
    {
      ext::pgvector::Config {
        id: 12b5c70f-0bb8-508a-845f-ca3d41103b6f,
        probes: 1,
        ef_search: 40,
      },
    }

Updating the value can be done using the ``configure session`` command:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> configure session
    ... set ext::pgvector::Config::probes := 5;
    OK: CONFIGURE SESSION

It is also possible to restore the default config value:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> configure session reset ext::pgvector::Config::probes;
    OK: CONFIGURE SESSION


Authentication
--------------

We're bringing two popular "passwordless" authentication schemes to our
``auth`` extension: the Web Authentication API (commonly known as WebAuthn or
Passkeys), as well as email-based "magic links".

We've also added two popular chat platforms to our list of supported OAuth
providers: Slack and Discord.

We also have the following updates:

* Allow passing WebAuthn ``user_handle`` in request body
  (:eql:gh:`#6942`)

* Handle WebAuthn challenge having multiple factors
  (:eql:gh:`#6945`)

* Explicitly pass WebAuthn credential properties
  (:eql:gh:`#6975`)

* Return JSON for magic link register
  (:eql:gh:`#6974`)

* Ensure built-in UI verification redirect includes code
  (:eql:gh:`#6982`)

* Ensure WebAuthn redirect matches expected shape
  (:eql:gh:`#6987`)

* Fallback to PKCE RFC parameter names
  (:eql:gh:`#7034`)

* Add optional PKCE challenge in email verification
  (:eql:gh:`#7037`)


Additional changes
==================

Performance
-----------

The query compilation cache is now persisted across restarts, and cached
queries are automatically recompiled after migrations are applied.

We've also improved processing of large schemas and migrations.


EdgeQL
------

* Allow omitting ``union`` in ``for`` if the body is a statement.
  (:eql:gh:`#6810`)

  If the ``for`` query body involves a statement such as ``insert``,
  ``update``, ``delete``, etc., you no longer need to write the ``union``
  keyword and add parentheses around the statement expression:

  .. code-block:: edgeql-diff

      for name in {'Alice', 'Billie', 'Cameron'}
    - union (
      insert User { name := name }
    - )

* Add ``administer vacuum()`` command.
  (:eql:gh:`#6663`)

  The command ``administer vacuum()`` can take a list of object types, multi
  properties, multi links or links with link properties. There is also a named
  only argument ``full`` that reclaims storage to the OS rather than just to
  the database. All of the arguments can be omitted. In case no target types
  are specified, everything accessible to the user will be vacuumed.

  The vacuum command will use already allocated space better so that it will
  reduce the growth rate of the database, or will reclaim storage space to the
  operating system with ``full``. Since certain aspects such as multi
  properties and links as well as links with link properties require additional
  underlying tables they can be listed separately when reclaiming storage
  space.

  If the ``full`` option is set to ``true``, reclaimed storage is returned to
  the OS, but it can take much longer and will exclusively lock the underlying
  tables.

  For example, the following command will vacuum the ``User`` type reclaiming
  storage to the OS:

  .. code-block:: edgeql

    administer vacuum(User, full := true)

* Integer/UUID to bytes conversion.
  (:eql:gh:`#6553`)

  It is now possible to convert :eql:type:`int16`, :eql:type:`int32`,
  :eql:type:`int64`, and :eql:type:`uuid` to :eql:type:`bytes` and vice-versa
  using the corresponding conversion functions.

  Use the :eql:func:`to_bytes` to convert values into :eql:type:`bytes`:

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

      db> select to_bytes(<int32>31, Endian.Big);
      {b'\x00\x00\x00\x1f'}
      db> select to_int32(b'\x01\x02\x00\x07', Endian.Big);
      {16908295}

      db> select to_bytes(<uuid>'1d70c86e-cc92-11ee-b4c7-a7aa0a34e2ae');
      {b'\x1dp\xc8n\xcc\x92\x11\xee\xb4\xc7\xa7\xaa\n4\xe2\xae'}
      db> select to_uuid(
      ...   b'\x92\x67\x3a\xfc\
      ...     \x9c\x4f\
      ...     \x42\xb3\
      ...     \x82\x73\
      ...     \xaf\xe0\x05\x3f\x0f\x48');
      {92673afc-9c4f-42b3-8273-afe0053f0f48}


* Add ``bytes`` option to ``array_join``.
  (:eql:gh:`#6918`)

  The :eql:func:`array_join` can now operate on :eql:type:`bytes` the same way
  it operates on :eql:type:`str`:

  .. code-block:: edgeql-repl

      db> select array_join([b'\x01', b'\x02', b'\x03'], b'\xff');
      {b'\x01\xff\x02\xff\x03'}

* Support closing all connections to a database on ``drop database``.
  (:eql:gh:`#6780`)

* Add a ``std::get_current_branch()`` function.
  (:eql:gh:`#7001`)

* Add ``cfg::Config.query_cache_mode``
  (:eql:gh:`#7158`)

Bug fixes
---------

* Fix issues with empty sets leaking out of optional scopes
  (:eql:gh:`#6747`)

* Fix an SDL scalar type dependency bug

* Suppress idle transaction timeout during migrations
  (:eql:gh:`#6760`)

* Use a consistent interface for ``ext::auth`` errors
  (:eql:gh:`#6751`)

* Stop recording extension version in dumps
  (:eql:gh:`#6787`)

* For any index changes don't attempt to update the index, drop and recreate
  instead
  (:eql:gh:`#6797`, :eql:gh:`#6843`)

* Fix duration/memory config in config objects
  (:eql:gh:`#6827`)

* Properly report errors involving newly created types
  (:eql:gh:`#6852`)

* Changes to vector length in migrations result in suggesting a
  ``drop``/``create``
  (:eql:gh:`#6882`)

* Report topological cycle errors in migrations as real errors
  (:eql:gh:`#6883`)

* Make constraint error details contain useful information for developers
  (:eql:gh:`#6796`)

* Fix interaction between DML and ``if...then...else``
  (:eql:gh:`#6917`)

* Don't leak objects out of access policies when used in a computed global
  (:eql:gh:`#6926`)

* Allow grouping to have trailing comma
  (:eql:gh:`#7002`)

* Fix computed single scalar globals
  (:eql:gh:`#6999`)

* Fix ISE when creating an alias with a name that already exists
  (:eql:gh:`#6946`)

* Fix parser at unrecoverable errors
  (:eql:gh:`#7046`)

* Improve error when applying a shape to a parameter
  (:eql:gh:`#7044`)

* Skip creating @source/@target on derived views improving performance
  (:eql:gh:`#7051`)

* Fix issues with cached global shapes and global cardinality inference
  (:eql:gh:`#7062`)

* Add error when a constant set is used in singleton mode
  (:eql:gh:`#7065`)

* Fix update rewrites on types that are children of updated type
  (:eql:gh:`#7073`)

* Make escaping strings more consistent
  (:eql:gh:`#7059`)

* Allow an update to trigger an insert of the same type, and vice versa
  (:eql:gh:`#7082`)

* Set "Connection: close" for non-keep-alive requests
  (:eql:gh:`#7087`)

* Fix volatility of ``fts::search``
  (:eql:gh:`#7106`)

* Allow trailing commas and semicolons in most places
  (:eql:gh:`#6963`)

* Drop special handling of type intersection in cardinality inference
  (:eql:gh:`#7089`)

* Add error when :eql:type:`enum` length exceeds 63
  (:eql:gh:`#7123`)

* Fix two issues directly reading pointers from a group
  (:eql:gh:`#7130`)

* Check singleton expressions in constraints and indexes
  (:eql:gh:`#7128`)

* Fix two bugs affecting unions in computed links
  (:eql:gh:`#7139`)

* Fix two ``group`` bugs involving ``using`` clauses
  (:eql:gh:`#7143`)

* Fix deserialization of persistent cache entries after upgrade
  (:eql:gh:`#7203`)

* Accept session changes in transactions
  (:eql:gh:`#7187`)

* Fix ISEs in constant detection for ``fts::with_options``
  (:eql:gh:`#7192`)

* pg_ext: don't yield NoData in SimpleQuery
  (:eql:gh:`#7200`)

* Make changing ``fts`` and ``ai`` indexes work consistently in migrations
  (:eql:gh:`#7218`)

* Include ``fts`` and ``ai`` shadow index columns in dumps
  (:eql:gh:`#7235`)

5.1
===

* Make ai::search have integrated sort and hit indexes
  (:eql:gh:`#7242`)

* Fix upgrading from rc1 that had been updated itself from a beta
  (:eql:gh:`#7245`)

5.2
===

* Allow multiple authentication methods per transport in
  ``--default-auth-method``.
  (:eql:gh:`#7224`)

  We now allow multiple authentication methods to be tried in sequence
  (according to the specified order in ``--default-auth-method``).

* Drop ad-hoc TLS requirement from ``JWT`` and ``Password`` auth
  (:eql:gh:`#7231`)

* Reject ``ai`` indexes that have different parameters than in parent types
  (:eql:gh:`#7229`)

* Allow except in link constraints.
  (:eql:gh:`#7250`)

5.3
===

* Force return cast on range get upper and lower functions.
  (:eql:gh:`#7251`)

* Prevent dump hangups from leaving stray Postgres queries.
  (:eql:gh:`#7262`)

* Switch ``EDGEDB_DEBUG_EDGEQL_TEXT_IN_SQL`` to encode string as
  :eql:type:`json`
  (:eql:gh:`#7267`)

* Don't inject exclusive conflict checks for updates without children.
  (:eql:gh:`#7271`)

* Fix doing a no-op ``update`` to an exclusive multi pointer with children.
  (:eql:gh:`#7272`)

* Fix constraint handling when pointer has cardinality or computedness
  changed.
  (:eql:gh:`#7279`)

* Fix regression in using some :eql:type:`tuple` literals as a default.
  (:eql:gh:`#7281`)

* Make link properties (including @source/@target) work in conflict selects.
  (:eql:gh:`#7284`)

* Create key derivation function for signing each different kind of JWTs in
  the ``auth`` extension
  (:eql:gh:`#7285`)

  This avoids accidentally being able to use other (short-lived) JWT tokens
  as the ``auth_token`` JWT directly.

5.4
===

* Improve error message when creating union with incompatible types.
  (:eql:gh:`#7278`)

* Fix handling of enums in arrays and multi properties for GraphQL.
  (:eql:gh:`#3990`)

* Fix modifying global that is used in a policy on a type it refers to.
  (:eql:gh:`#7310`)

* Fix a bug involving globals in a somewhat complex interaction with policies.
  (:eql:gh:`#7314`)

* Set content-type header for AI extension errors.
  (:eql:gh:`#7324`)

* Fix an ``UNLESS CONFLICT`` on links performance regression.
  (:eql:gh:`#7349`)

* Fix ``EDGEDB_SERVER_CONFIG`` configuration of enum values.
  (:eql:gh:`#7350`)

* Only decode url encoded slashes in db/branch name after splitting path into
  parts.
  (:eql:gh:`#7352`)

* Fix an issue with collection types that affected some migrations.
  (:eql:gh:`#7375`)

5.5
===

* Fix recompilation slowdowns after several migrations
  (:eql:gh:`#7099`)

* Fix dumps of types that have both AI and FTS indexes
  (:eql:gh:`#7405`)

* Fix single-tenant metrics not to filter by tenant
  (:eql:gh:`#7385`)

* Fix rewrite expressions using ``__specified__`` sometimes
  generating InvalidReferenceError.
  (:eql:gh:`#7392`)

* Raise error when using query params in schema.
  (:eql:gh:`#7400`)

* Add expression to index friendly name.
  (:eql:gh:`#7401`)

* Treat target and link properties as different when expanding splats.
  (:eql:gh:`#7402`)

* Remove redundant primary key constraint on 'id'.
  (:eql:gh:`#7418`)

* workflows: Use an explicit label when selecting runners for builds
  (:eql:gh:`#7416`)

* Log errors raised when handling ext::ai HTTP requests
  (:eql:gh:`#7436`)

* ai: Properly forward non-successful responses from non-streaming chat
  (:eql:gh:`#7440`)

* Fix ai::to_context duplication
  (:eql:gh:`#7464`)

* Support configuring more arguments with env vars
  (:eql:gh:`#7470`)

* Use SQL's ``ON CONFLICT`` to implement ``UNLESS CONFLICT`` more often
  (:eql:gh:`#7472`)

* Fix a race condition where older database configs can overwrite newer ones
  (:eql:gh:`#7485`)

* Allow subdomains in redirects in the ``auth`` extension
  (:eql:gh:`#7488`)

* Fix tenant shutdown in multi-tenant mode
  (:eql:gh:`#7495`)

* Fix migration creation when adding a new base class with certain constraints
  (:eql:gh:`#7508`)

* Fix ``pg_dump`` of an empty schema using the SQL adapter
  (:eql:gh:`#7445`)

* Fix SQL adapter ``COPY`` command
  (:eql:gh:`#7446`)

5.6
===

* Fix interaction of implicit limit with explicit OFFSET
  (:eql:gh:`#7509`)

* Make persistent query cache work for queries that have no constant
  literals in them
  (:eql:gh:`#7237`)

* Unbreak cache recompilation after a restart
  (:eql:gh:`#7515`, :eql:gh:`#7520`)

* Add a ``auto_rebuild_query_cache_timeout`` config setting that controls
  how long the server will spend recompiling cached queries after a migration.
  The default is one minute.
  (:eql:gh:`#7518`)
