.. _ref_eql_for:

For
===

EdgeQL supports a top-level ``for`` statement. These "for loops" iterate over
each element of some input set, execute some expression with it, and merge the
results into a single output set.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> for number in {0, 1, 2, 3}
  ... union (
  ...   select { number, number + 0.5 }
  ... );
  {0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5}

This statement iterates through each number in the set. Inside the loop, the
``number`` variable is bound to a singleton set. The inner expression is
executed for every element of the input set, and the results of each execution
are merged into a single output set.

.. note::

  The ``union`` keyword is a required part of the ``for`` statement syntax; it
  is intended to indicate explicitly that the results of each loop execution
  are ultimately merged.

Bulk inserts
------------

The ``for`` statement is commonly used for bulk inserts.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> for hero_name in {'Cersi', 'Ikaris', 'Thena'}
  ... union (
  ...   insert Hero { name := hero_name }
  ... );
  {
    default::Hero {id: d7d7e0f6-40ae-11ec-87b1-3f06bed494b9},
    default::Hero {id: d7d7f870-40ae-11ec-87b1-f712a4efc3a5},
    default::Hero {id: d7d7f8c0-40ae-11ec-87b1-6b8685d56610}
  }

This statement iterates through each name in the list of names. Inside the
loop, ``hero_name`` is bound to a ``str`` singleton, so it can be assigned to
``Hero.name``.

Instead of literal sets, it's common to use a :ref:`json <ref_std_json>`
parameter for bulk inserts. This value is then "unpacked" into a set of
``json`` elements and used inside the ``for`` loop:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> with
  ...   raw_data := <json>$data,
  ... for item in json_array_unpack(raw_data) union (
  ...   insert Hero { name := <str>item['name'] }
  ... );
  Parameter <json>$data: [{"name":"Sersi"},{"name":"Ikaris"},{"name":"Thena"}]
  {
    default::Hero {id: d7d7e0f6-40ae-11ec-87b1-3f06bed494b9},
    default::Hero {id: d7d7f870-40ae-11ec-87b1-f712a4efc3a5},
    default::Hero {id: d7d7f8c0-40ae-11ec-87b1-6b8685d56610}
  }


A similar approach can be used for bulk updates.


.. _ref_eql_for_conditional_dml:

Conditional DML
---------------

.. versionadded:: 4.0

    DML is now supported in ``if..else``. The method of achieving conditional
    DML demonstrated below is a workaround for earlier versions of EdgeDB
    before this support was introduced in EdgeDB 4.0. If you're on EdgeDB 4.0
    or higher, use :eql:op:`if..else` for a cleaner way to achieve conditional
    DML.

DML (i.e., :ref:`insert <ref_eql_insert>`, :ref:`update <ref_eql_update>`,
:ref:`delete <ref_eql_delete>`) is not supported in :eql:op:`if..else`. If you
need to do one of these conditionally, you can use a ``for`` loop as a
workaround. For example, you might want to write this conditional:

.. code-block::

    # ðŸš«
    with admin := (select User filter .role = 'admin')
    select admin if exists admin
      else (insert User {role := 'admin'});

Because of the lack of support for DML in a conditional, this query will fail.
Here's how you can accomplish the same thing using the workaround:

.. code-block:: edgeql

    # âœ…
    with
      admin := (select User filter .role = 'admin'),
      new := (for _ in (select () filter not exists admin) union (
        insert User {role := 'admin'}
      )),
    select {admin, new};

The ``admin`` alias represents the condition we want to test for. In this case,
"do we have a ``User`` object with a value of ``admin`` for the ``role``
property?" In the ``new`` alias, we write a ``for`` loop with a ``select``
query that will produce a set with a single value if that object we queried for
does *not* exist. (You can use ``exists`` instead of ``not exists`` in the
nested ``select`` inside the ``for`` loop if you don't want to invert the
condition.)

A set with a single value results in a single iteration of the ``for`` loop.
Inside that loop, we run our conditional DML â€” in this case to insert an admin
user. Then we ``select`` both aliases to execute both of their queries. The
query will return the ``User`` object. This in effect gives us a query that
will insert a ``User`` object with a ``role`` of ``admin`` if none exists or
return that object if it *does* exist.

.. note::

    If you're trying to conditionally run DML in response to a violation of an
    exclusivity constraint, you don't need this workaround. You should use
    :ref:`unless conflict <ref_eql_insert_conflicts>` instead.

.. list-table::
  :class: seealso

  * - **See also**
  * - :ref:`Reference > Commands > For <ref_eql_statements_for>`
