.. _ref_eql_insert:

Insert
======

The ``insert`` command is used to create instances of object types. The code
samples on this page assume the following schema:

.. code-block:: sdl

  module default {
    abstract type Person {
      required property name -> str { constraint exclusive };
    }

    type Hero extending Person {
      property secret_identity -> str;
      multi link villains := .<nemesis[is Villain];
    }

    type Villain extending Person {
      link nemesis -> Hero;
    }

    type Movie {
      required property title -> str { constraint exclusive };
      required property release_year -> int64;
      multi link characters -> Person;
    }
  }


.. _ref_eql_insert_basic:

Basic usage
-----------

You can ``insert`` instances of any *non-abstract* object type.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Hero {
  ...   name := "Spider-Man",
  ...   secret_identity := "Peter Parker"
  ... };
  {default::Hero {id: b0fbe9de-3e90-11ec-8c12-ffa2d5f0176a}}

Similar to :ref:`selecting fields <ref_eql_shapes>` in ``select``, ``insert``
statements include a *shape* specified with ``curly braces``; the values of
properties/links are assigned with the ``:=`` operator.

Optional links or properties can be omitted entirely, as well as those with a
``default`` value (like ``id``).

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Hero {
  ...   name := "Spider-Man"
  ...   # secret_identity is omitted
  ... };
  {default::Hero {id: b0fbe9de-3e90-11ec-8c12-ffa2d5f0176a}}

You can only ``insert`` instances of concrete (non-abstract) object types.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Person {
  ...   name := "The Man With No Name"
  ... };
  error: QueryError: cannot insert into abstract object type 'default::Person'

.. _ref_eql_insert_links:

Inserting links
---------------

EdgeQL's composable syntax makes link insertion painless. Below, we insert
"Avengers: Endgame" and include all known heroes and villains as
``characters`` (which is basically true).

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Movie {
  ...   title := "Spider-Man: No Way Home",
  ...   characters := (
  ...     select Person
  ...     filter .name in {
  ...       'Spider-Man',
  ...       'Doctor Strange',
  ...       'Doc Ock',
  ...       'Green Goblin'
  ...     }
  ...   )
  ... };
  {default::Movie {id: 9b1cf9e6-3e95-11ec-95a2-138eeb32759c}}

To assign to the ``Movie.characters`` link, we're using a *subquery*. This
subquery is executed and resolves to a singleton set of type ``Person``, which
is assignable to ``characters``.  Note that the inner ``select Person``
statement is wrapped in parentheses; this is required for all subqueries in
EdgeQL.

Now let's assign to a *single link*.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Villain {
  ...   name := "Doc Ock",
  ...   nemesis := (select Hero filter .name = "Spider-Man")
  ... };


This query is valid because the inner subquery is guaranteed to return at most
one ``Hero`` object, due to the uniqueness constraint on ``Hero.name``. If you
are filtering on a non-exclusive property, use ``assert_single`` to guarantee
that the subquery will return zero or one results. If more than one result is
returned, this query will fail at runtime.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Villain {
  ...   name := "Doc Ock",
  ...   nemesis := assert_single((
  ...     select Hero
  ...     filter .secret_identity = "Peter B. Parker"
  ...   ))
  ... };


.. _ref_eql_insert_nested:

Nested inserts
--------------

Just as we used subqueries to populate links with existing objects, we can also
execute *nested inserts*.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Villain {
  ...   name := "The Mandarin",
  ...   nemesis := (insert Hero {
  ...     name := "Shang-Chi",
  ...     secret_identity := "Shaun"
  ...   })
  ... };
  {default::Villain {id: d47888a0-3e7b-11ec-af13-fb68c8777851}}


Now let's write a nested insert for a ``multi`` link.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Movie {
  ...   title := "Black Widow",
  ...   characters := {
  ...     (select Hero filter .name = "Black Widow"),
  ...     (insert Hero { name := "Yelena Belova"}),
  ...     (insert Villain {
  ...       name := "Dreykov",
  ...       nemesis := (select Hero filter .name = "Black Widow")
  ...     })
  ...   }
  ... };
  {default::Movie {id: af706c7c-3e98-11ec-abb3-4bbf3f18a61a}}

We are using :ref:`set literal syntax <ref_eql_set_constructor>` to construct a
set literal containing several ``select`` and ``insert`` subqueries. This set
contains a mix of ``Hero`` and ``Villain`` objects; since these are both
subtypes of ``Person`` (the expected type of ``Movie.characters``), this is
valid.

You also can't *assign* to a computed property or link; these fields don't
actually exist in the database.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Hero {
  ...   name := "Ant-Man",
  ...   villains := (select Villain)
  ... };
  error: QueryError: modification of computed link 'villains' of object type
  'default::Hero' is prohibited

.. _ref_eql_insert_with:

With block
----------

In the previous query, we selected Black Widow twice: once in the
``characters`` set and again as the ``nemesis`` of Dreykov. In circumstances
like this, you should pull that subquery into a ``with`` block.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> with black_widow := (select Hero filter .name = "Black Widow")
  ... insert Movie {
  ...   title := "Black Widow",
  ...   characters := {
  ...     black_widow,
  ...     (insert Hero { name := "Yelena Belova"}),
  ...     (insert Villain {
  ...       name := "Dreykov",
  ...       nemesis := black_widow
  ...     })
  ...   }
  ... };
  {default::Movie {id: af706c7c-3e98-11ec-abb3-4bbf3f18a61a}}


The ``with`` block can contain an arbitrary number of clauses; later clauses
can reference earlier ones.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> with
  ...  black_widow := (select Hero filter .name = "Black Widow"),
  ...  yelena := (insert Hero { name := "Yelena Belova"}),
  ...  dreykov := (insert Villain {name := "Dreykov", nemesis := black_widow})
  ... insert Movie {
  ...   title := "Black Widow",
  ...   characters := { black_widow, yelena, dreykov }
  ... };
  {default::Movie {id: af706c7c-3e98-11ec-abb3-4bbf3f18a61a}}


.. _ref_eql_insert_conflicts:

Conflicts
---------

EdgeDB provides a general-purpose mechanism for gracefully handling possible
exclusivity constraint violations. Consider a scenario where we are trying to
``insert`` Eternals (the ``Movie``), but we can't remember if it already exists
in the database.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Movie {
  ...   title := "Eternals"
  ... }
  ... unless conflict on .title
  ... else (select Movie);
  {default::Movie {id: af706c7c-3e98-11ec-abb3-4bbf3f18a61a}}

This query attempts to ``insert`` Eternals. If it already exists in the
database, it will violate the uniqueness constraint on ``Movie.title``, causing
a *conflict* on the ``title`` field. The ``else`` clause is then executed and
returned instead. In essence, ``unless conflict`` lets us "catch" exclusivity
conflicts and provide a fallback expression.

.. note::

  Note that the ``else`` clause is simply ``select Movie``. There's no need to
  apply additional filters on ``Movie``; in the context of the ``else`` clause,
  ``Movie`` is bound to the conflicting object.

.. note::

    Using ``unless conflict`` on :ref:`multi properties
    <ref_datamodel_props_cardinality>` is only supported in 2.10 and later.

.. _ref_eql_upsert:

Upserts
^^^^^^^

There are no limitations on what the ``else`` clause can contain; it can be any
EdgeQL expression, including an :ref:`update <ref_eql_update>` statement. This
lets you express *upsert* logic in a single EdgeQL query.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> with
  ...   title := "Eternals",
  ...   release_year := 2021
  ... insert Movie {
  ...   title := title,
  ...   release_year := release_year
  ... }
  ... unless conflict on .title
  ... else (
  ...   update Movie set { release_year := release_year }
  ... );
  {default::Movie {id: f1bf5ac0-3e9d-11ec-b78d-c7dfb363362c}}

When a conflict occurs during the initial ``insert``, the statement falls back
to the ``update`` statement in the ``else`` clause. This updates the
``release_year`` of the conflicting object.

To learn to use upserts by trying them yourself, see `our interactive upserts
tutorial </tutorial/data-mutations/upsert>`_.


Suppressing failures
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``else`` clause is optional; when omitted, the ``insert`` statement will
return an *empty set* if a conflict occurs. This is a common way to prevent
``insert`` queries from failing on constraint violations.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> insert Hero { name := "The Wasp" } # initial insert
  ... unless conflict;
  {default::Hero {id: 35b97a92-3e9b-11ec-8e39-6b9695d671ba}}
  db> insert Hero { name := "The Wasp" } # The Wasp now exists
  ... unless conflict;
  {}

.. _ref_eql_insert_bulk:

Bulk inserts
------------

Bulk inserts are performed by passing in a JSON array as a :ref:`query
parameter <ref_eql_params>`, :eql:func:`unpacking <json_array_unpack>` it, and
using a :ref:`for loop <ref_eql_for>` to insert the objects.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

  db> with
  ...   raw_data := <json>$data,
  ... for item in json_array_unpack(raw_data) union (
  ...   insert Hero { name := <str>item['name'] }
  ... );
  Parameter <json>$data: [{"name":"Sersi"},{"name":"Ikaris"},{"name":"Thena"}]
  {
    default::Hero {id: 35b97a92-3e9b-11ec-8e39-6b9695d671ba},
    default::Hero {id: 35b97a92-3e9b-11ec-8e39-6b9695d671ba},
    default::Hero {id: 35b97a92-3e9b-11ec-8e39-6b9695d671ba},
    ...
  }


.. list-table::
  :class: seealso

  * - **See also**
  * - :ref:`Reference > Commands > Insert <ref_eql_statements_insert>`
  * - :ref:`Cheatsheets > Inserting data <ref_cheatsheet_insert>`
  * - `Tutorial > Data Mutations > Insert
      </tutorial/data-mutations/insert>`_
  * - `Tutorial > Data Mutations > Upsert
      </tutorial/data-mutations/upsert>`_
