.. _ref_edgeql_statements:


Statements
==========

EdgeQL has Select_, Group_, Insert_, Update_, and Delete_ statements
for managing the data in the DB. Each of these statements can also be
used as an *expression* if it is enclosed in parentheses, in which
case they also return a value.

.. note::

    Running ``INSERT`` and other DML statements bare in repl yields
    the cardinality of the affected set.

Every statement consists of 2 blocks: :ref:`with
block<ref_edgeql_with>` and *main* statement block. Each of the blocks
defines its own scope which is relevant for
:ref:`how paths are interpreted <ref_edgeql_paths>`. In the following
examples, however, the ``WITH`` block will only be used for declaring
the ``MODULE`` for simplicity. The *main* block is a sequence of
clauses, where each clause is a
:ref:`set operation<ref_edgeql_expressions_setops>` modifying the
data the statement produces. The data flow can be seen as top-to-
bottom from more general to the more specific. Mathematically each
clause is a function that takes a set as input and produces a set as
output and each such function is applied to the output of the previous
clause.

Select
------

A ``SELECT`` statement returns a set of objects. By default it is
assumed to be a set of arbitrary cardinality. In case of various kinds
of serialization this may affect how the result is treated.

The data flow of a ``SELECT`` block can be conceptualized like this:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    # optional generator (generally not used with SELECT)
    FOR <it>        # repeat for every element <it>
        IN <expr>   # of the set represented by <expr>

    SELECT
        <expr>  # compute a set of things

    # optional clause
    FILTER
        <expr>  # filter the computed set

    # optional clause
    ORDER BY
        <expr>  # define ordering of the filtered set

    # optional clause
    OFFSET/LIMIT
        <expr>  # slice the filtered/ordered set

Typically, there's little reason to use ``FOR`` clause with ``SELECT``
as a ``FILTER`` or an explicit ``UNION`` may accomplish the same thing
far more efficiently. Insert_ statement is the most typical use of
``FOR`` clause.

Please note that the ``ORDER BY`` clause defines ordering that can
only be relied upon within the same lexical statement (or for
serialized output), such as by the ``OFFSET`` and ``LIMIT`` clauses or
enclosing aggregate functions. The final result of any statement after
all the clauses have been applied is a *set* that lacks any inherent
order.

Consider an example using only the ``FILTER`` optional clause:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    SELECT User {
        name,
        <owned: Issue {
            number,
            body
        }
    }
    FILTER User.name LIKE 'Alice%';

The above example retrieves a single user with a specific name. The
fact that there is only one such user is a detail that can be well-
known and important to the creator of the DB, but otherwise non-
obvious. However, forcing the cardinality to be at most 1 by using the
keyword ``SINGLETON`` ensures that a set with a single object or
``{}`` is returned. This way any further code that relies on the
result of this query can safely assume there's only one result
available. In case EdgeDB generates more than one result for this
query, it is going to cause a runtime error in the EdgeDB code, making
it easier to debug.

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    SELECT SINGLETON User {
        name,
        <owned: Issue {
            number,
            body
        }
    }
    FILTER User.name LIKE 'Alice%';

Next example adds the use of ``ORDER BY`` and ``LIMIT`` clauses:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    SELECT Issue {
        number,
        body,
        due_date
    }
    FILTER
        EXISTS Issue.due_date
        AND
        Issue.status.name = 'Open'
    ORDER BY
        Issue.due_date
    LIMIT 3;

The above query retrieves the top 3 open Issues with the closest due
date.


Group
-----

A ``GROUP`` statement is used to allow operations on set partitions.
The input set is partitioned using expressions in the ``BY`` clause,
and then each partition is used as input to ``SELECT``. There are
various useful functions that require a set of values as their input -
aggregate functions. Simple aggregate function examples include
``count``, ``sum``, ``array_agg``. All of these are functions that map
a set of values onto a single value. A ``GROUP`` statement allows to
use aggregate functions to compute various properties of set
partitions.

The ``SELECT`` clause is used to describe the shape of the returned
value or values, while the optional qualifier ``SINGLETON`` declares
the cardinality of the returned set to be at most 1 (empty set is
considered a valid result where ``SINGLETON`` is expected).

The data flow of a ``GROUP`` block can be conceptualized like this:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    # optional generator (generally not used with GROUP)
    FOR <it>        # repeat for every element <it>
        IN <expr>   # of the set represented by <expr>

    GROUP
        <expr>  # compute a set of things

    BY
        <expr>  # divide into several sets based on some criteria

    SELECT
        <expr>  # map every grouped set onto a result set,
                # merging them all with a UNION ALL

    # optional clause
    FILTER
        <expr>  # filter the returned set of values

    # optional clause
    ORDER BY
        <expr>  # define ordering of the filtered set

    # optional clause
    OFFSET/LIMIT
        <expr>  # slice the filtered/ordered set

Consider the following example of a query that gets some statistics
about Issues, namely what's the total number of issues and time spent
per owner:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    GROUP Issue
    BY Issue.owner
    SELECT (
        owner := Issue.owner,
        total_issues := count(Issue),
        total_time := sum(Issue.time_spent_log.spent_time)
    );

Although, this particular query may rewritten without using ``GROUP``,
but as a ``SELECT`` it is a useful example to illustrate how ``GROUP``
works.

If there's a need to only look at statistics that end up over a
certain threshold of total time spent, a ``FILTER`` can be used in
conjunction with an alias of the ``SELECT`` clause result:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    GROUP Issue
    BY Issue.owner
    SELECT _stats = (
        owner := Issue.owner,
        total_issues := count(Issue),
        total_time := sum(Issue.time_spent_log.spent_time)
    )
    FILTER _stats.total_time > 10;

The choice of result alias is arbitrary, same as for the ``WITH``
block. The alias defined here exists in the scope of the ``SELECT``
block and can be used to apply ``FILTER``, ``ORDER BY``, ``OFFSET``
and ``LIMIT`` clauses.

If there's a need to filter the *input* set of Issues, then this can
be done by using a ``SELECT`` expression at the subject clause of the
``GROUP``:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    GROUP (
        SELECT Issue
        # in this GROUP only consider issues with watchers
        FILTER EXISTS Issue.watchers
    )
    BY Issue.owner
    SELECT _stats = (
        owner := Issue.owner,
        total_issues := count(Issue),
        total_time := sum(Issue.time_spent_log.spent_time)
    )
    FILTER _stats.total_time > 10;

Just as is the case with Select_, ``FOR`` clause is not typically used
here.

Insert
------

``INSERT`` allows creating new objects in EdgeDB. Notice that
generally ``id`` is not specified at creation time (although it can
be) and will be automatically generated by EdgeDB.

The data flow of an ``INSERT`` block can be conceptualized like this:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    # optional generator
    FOR <it>        # repeat for every element <it>
        IN <expr>   # of the set represented by <expr>

    INSERT
        <obj>           # create the following object



Notice that there are no other clauses except ``FOR`` in the
``INSERT`` statement. This is because it is a mutation statement and
not typically used to query the DB. It is still possible to use an
explicit ``SELECT`` statement and treat ``INSERT`` as an expression
the statement operates if filtering, ordering and slicing the results
of a mutation is required.

Here's a simple example of an ``INSERT`` statement creating a new user:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    INSERT User {
        name := 'Bob Johnson'
    };

``INSERT`` is not only a statement, but also an expression and as such
is has a value of the set of objects that has been created.

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    INSERT Issue {
        number := '100',
        body := 'Fix errors in INSERT',
        owner := (
            SELECT User FILTER User.name = 'Bob Johnson'
        )
    };

It is possible to create nested objects in a single ``INSERT``
statement as an atomic operation.

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    INSERT Issue {
        number := '101',
        body := 'Nested INSERT',
        owner: User{
            name := 'Nested User'
        }
    };

The above statement will create a new ``Issue`` as well as a new
``User`` as the owner of the ``Issue``. It will also return the new
``Issue`` linked to the new ``User`` if the statement is used as an
expression.

It is also possible to create new objects based on some existing data
either provided as an explicit list (possibly automatically generated
by some tool) or a query.

.. code-block:: eql

    # example of a bulk insert of users based on explicitly provided
    # data
    WITH MODULE example
    FOR x IN {'Alice', 'Bob', 'Carol', 'Dave'}
    INSERT User {
        name := x
    };

    # example of a bulk insert of issues based on a query
    WITH
        MODULE example,
        Elvis := (SELECT User FILTER .name = 'Elvis'),
        Open := (SELECT Status FILTER .name = 'Open')
    FOR Q IN (SELECT User FILTER .name ILIKE 'A%')
    INSERT Issue {
        name := Q.name + ' access problem',
        body := 'This user was affected by recent system glitch',
        owner := Elvis,
        status := Open
    };

The clause ``FOR <x> IN <expr>`` allows to perform bulk inserts. It is
equivalent to invoking ``INSERT`` statement separately once for every
element of the set generated by the provided expression all in a
single transaction. See :ref:`Usage of FOR clause<ref_edgeql_forclause>`
for more details.


Update
------

It is possible to update already existing objects via ``UPDATE``
statement. An update can target a single object or be a bulk update.
If used as an expression, it will return the set of objects on which
it operated.

The data flow of an ``UPDATE`` block can be conceptualized like this:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    # optional generator (uncommon for UPDATE)
    FOR <it>        # repeat for every element <it>
        IN <expr>   # of the set represented by <expr>

    UPDATE
        <expr>  # compute a set of things

    # optional clause
    FILTER
        <expr>  # filter the computed set

    SET
        <expr>  # update objects based on the
                # computed/filtered set

Notice that there are no ``ORDER``, ``OFFSET`` or ``LIMIT`` clauses in
the ``UPDATE`` statement. This is because it is a mutation statement
and not typically used to query the DB.

Here are a couple of examples of using the ``UPDATE`` statement:

.. code-block:: eql

    # update the user with the name 'Alice Smith'
    WITH MODULE example
    UPDATE User
    FILTER User.name = 'Alice Smith'
    SET {
        name := 'Alice J. Smith'
    };

    # update all users whose name is 'Bob'
    WITH MODULE example
    UPDATE User
    FILTER User.name LIKE 'Bob%'
    SET {
        name := User.name + '*'
    };

The clause ``FOR <x> IN <expr>`` allows to express certain bulk
updates more clearly. See :ref:`Usage of FOR clause<ref_edgeql_forclause>`
for more details.


Delete
------

``DELETE`` statement removes the specified set of objects from the
database. Therefore, a ``FILTER`` can be applied to the set being
removed, while the ``DELETE`` statement itself does not have a
``FILTER`` clause. Just like ``INSERT`` if used as an expression it
will return the set of removed objects.

The data flow of a ``DELETE`` block can be conceptualized like this:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    # optional generator (very uncommon for DELETE)
    FOR <it>        # repeat for every element <it>
        IN <expr>   # of the set represented by <expr>

    DELETE
        <expr>  # create the following object

Here's a simple example of deleting a specific user:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    DELETE (SELECT User
            FILTER User.name = 'Alice Smith');

Notice that there are no other clauses except ``FOR`` in the
``DELETE`` statement. This is because it is a mutation statement and
not typically used to query the DB. Even the ``FOR`` clause is very
uncommon with the ``DELETE`` statement as most fine-tuned filtering is
better done by a nested ``SELECT``:

.. code-block:: eql

    WITH MODULE example
    DELETE (SELECT User
            FILTER User.name = {'Alice Smith', 'Bob Johnson'});
